well good evening it's really great to
see so many of you here and I want to
thank you really from my from my heart
for braving the the weather to join us
for what I know will be a really special
evening my name is Carol Quillin and
it's my privilege to serve as president
of Davidson College and for those of you
whom I haven't seen yet after the break
welcome back we're really glad are
especially to our students we're really
glad you guys are back it is too quiet
when you're gone and I'm even enjoying
the loud music late on Friday nights
wafting into my window so thank you very
much for coming back and reminding me
that we do live on a college campus it's
a special privilege for me to be able to
introduce the person you're all here to
hear and learn from David Brooks I don't
need to rehearse his biography biography
for you you know him he's a Buckley
protege he's been a crime reporter
international correspondent op-ed writer
pretty good writer generally and
probably what's most important right now
he's one of the very few public
intellectuals whose words are heard and
respected across much of the political
spectrum and for that I personally am
deeply grateful David is also my friend
we share the bond that I know our
students feel here at Davidson and that
we went to the same undergraduate
institution we'd like to say we were
college classmates though we didn't
actually know each other while we were
in college something I might add that
would not happen here at Davidson but we
share I think a certain bond that comes
from that common experience and what I
think doesn't necessarily always come
through in David's public persona is his
genuine warmth his willingness to be
vulnerable and the ways in which he
expansively seeks to understand the full
range of the human experience in an
effort to help all of us
lead a fully human meaningful life and
as by way of introduction I just like to
read a few words that David himself
wrote just a few days ago in the New
York Times the Liberal Democratic moral
order stands for the idea that souls are
formed in freedom and not incivility in
expansiveness not in stagnation it
stands for the idea that our coven ental
institutions like family faith tradition
and community orient us towards higher
loves and common dreams that we then
pursue in the great gymnasium of Liberty
please help me in welcoming David Brooks
thank you I wasn't actually gonna tell
this story but Carol and I met I don't
know 10 15 years ago now we I was going
down to rice where she was then working
and we were seated next to each other at
a baseball game and we sort of sensed at
least I sensed have something in common
with this person couldn't quite figure
out what it was
do you were you from she's from Delaware
and don't really know anybody in
Delaware finally I said well what
college did you go to oh you know
Chicago so did I well year my graduating
83 well so did I what was your major
American history oh so it was I who was
your senior advisor a guy named Neil
Harris so his I and so we were in the
same Senior Seminar but we didn't know
each other for a year which there were a
lot of five-foot-six Jewish looking guys
there there weren't a lot of Carroll so
I think it's more on me than on her it's
a great pleasure to be back at Davidson
I think this is my third or fourth visit
now and it's always a pleasure to be
here and especially to meet with the
students I am as you can tell from the
Chicago background a rather bookish
person when I was eight I read a book
called Paddington the bear and decided
at that moment I wanted to become a
writer and I remember in high school I
wanted to date a woman named Bernice she
didn't want to date me she want to date
some other guy and I remember thinking
what is she thinking I write way better
than that guy
and so writing and books have always
been on my mind I I when I was 18 the
admissions officers at Columbia Brown
and Wesley and decided I should go to
the University of Chicago and so as some
people know the phrase about where we
went as the the school where fun goes to
die but my favorite phrase about it is
it's a Baptist school or a theist
professors teach Jewish students Saint
Thomas Aquinas it captures it and it is
a book of school the kids wear t-shirts
that say sure it works in practice but
does it work in theory I myself as I
mentioned I majored in history and
celibacy while I was there I I'm not
like the students you meet here at
Davidson are so accomplished in the
world you know you ask them what they're
doing spring break it's you know I'm you
know cycling across Thailand while
reading to lepers that sort of thing but
I learned some intellectual skills how
to dominate classroom discussion while
doing none of the reading stood me in
great stead in my current profession
there's true I manage something called
the friend of mine decide to go into
boxing his we called him the kosher
killer and but he we did at the Chicago
Way where he didn't actually practice
boxing we read books about boxing and
then we entered the Chicago Golden
Gloves and he got a series of byes so he
made it to the semi-finals where his
boxing career lasted 92 seconds and so
it was bookish and then I went off into
my current role which involves a lot of
writing and speaking on TV I was hired
in the early days of cable they thought
the best way to build a cable audience
around political talk was to hire really
good-looking people and that's when I
got my job and I do something on the
NewsHour called shields and Brooks with
mark shields
thank you
we want to call it Brooke Shields that
would have been better but my joke I was
just telling some folks at dinner is
that Marcus a little olders been doing
it for a little while so now the segment
is called shields and Brooks
before that it was shields and she go
and before that shields and GU gergan
before that was shields and Coolidge
before the shields and Maimonides I
think you served that gun but working on
the NewsHour I do know that we have a
certain demographic that's in our
audience so when a 93 year old lady
comes up to me at the airport I know
what she's gonna say it's like I don't
want your show but my mother loves it so
it's really big in the hospice community
and then I got hired to be a
conservative columnist of the New York
Times which is a job I liken to being
chief rabbi at Mecca which is not a lot
a company there and so it's a job that
involves a lot of reading a lot of
writing a fair bit of solitude and a lot
where you've got to develop a reputation
for being smart I actually ran across
something the other week a woman named
Sarah Cooper wrote something how to
appear smart at meetings which I found
very useful if somebody mentions the
percentage she wrote turned into a
fraction so if they say oh that's 25%
you pause and say oh one in four that
seems really smart draw a meaningless
Venn diagrams the president the past the
future and then you said we want to be
right in the sweet spot in the middle in
the present halfway through any
PowerPoint presentation just pause and
say can you go back to slide and then
write something down mysteriously seem
like you're thinking more deeply and so
appearing smart is part of the job that
a lot of us are involved in as I get
older I think I like to think I'm not
just a brain I try to get a little more
spiritual a little more feminine I'm the
only man in America who finished that
book Eat Pray Love
I was actually lactating on page 123 by
then and then I wrote a book about
emotion called the social animal and my
friends joked when I wrote that book it
was like Gandhi writing a book about
gluttony because I'm not my natural
thing and then more recently I've wrote
a book on character called the road to
character and on the course of that book
I learned that writing a book on
character doesn't give you good
character and even reading a book on
character but buying a book on character
does so I've tried to emphasize so far
the headiness the the brainy aspect of
what I do but I'm one of the things I
want to argue as a precursor where I
really want to say is in my view the
rational brain is the third most
important part of our consciousness and
that the first is the desiring heart
we're not primarily thinking creatures
were primarily desiring creatures and I
read about a guy recently who who bought
a house which had a bamboo stand by the
driveway in the front yard he hated
bamboo so he chopped down all the bamboo
trees he dug out all the roots he
chopped up all the ground he put plant
soy plant poison in the hole he covered
the whole the poison over with gravel
and he covered the gravel over with
cement and two years later a little
bamboo shoot' shoots up through the
cement and I think we sort of all have
that in ourselves we all have this
desire this yearning that keeps us
moving and primarily it's a desire for
love and for connection that it's the
connection with other people that
actually wires the brain together when
we're young in 1945 a woman studied
orphanages in Nevada I think where they
wanted to keep the kids free from germs
and disease so they fed them and they
gave them outstanding medical care but
they didn't touch the babies because
they want to keep them clean and
germ-free and by the age to thirty seven
percent of the babies had died and they
stopped naming the kids because they
were
such great rates its actual affectionate
touch in the emotional touch that wires
the fibers of the brain together we
survive by that kind of NFC the grant
study is the greatest longitudinal study
ever done in America about a bunch of
guys who went to Harvard at 1940s they
studied them all through life and the
men who had no deep love in their homes
were three times more likely to suffer
from mental illness 2.5 times more
likely to suffer from dementia they made
50% less money over the course of their
careers the number one predictor of
success in that study was not IQ
it was emotion in the home and similarly
as I saw a study of men who rose to
success as Army as Army soldiers in
World War two and the thing that
correlated success in the army again was
not IQ was not physical courage was not
socioeconomic status it was relationship
with mother and those would receive the
love and flood of love from their mom
could give it to their men and they were
good officers and so were propelled by
our lives by this desire to unity to
escape the prison of the self and be
joined with other people it's a kind of
feeling that was well captured in a book
called Captain Corelli's Mandolin
written by Louie de Bernier he in the
early in the book he's got an old guy
who's talking to his daughter about his
relationship with his late wife and he
says this love itself is what is left
over when being in love is burned away
and this is both an art and a fortunate
accident your mother and I had it
we had roots roots that grew toward each
other underground and when all the
pretty blossoms had fallen from our
branches we discovered that we were one
tree and not two and that's sort of the
dream that we are desiring creatures we
desire other people we desire
relationships and that we're defined by
our desires sometimes we in the
university business think with the kids
are just brains on sticks
but Agustin someone and Carol and I both
admire has he thought we were
fundamentally desiring our hearts were
more important than our brains the
second most important faculty is the
yearning soul
I'm not gonna ask you to believe in God
that's not really my department but I
would ask you to believe there's some
piece of you that has no shape size or
color but as of infinite value and
dignity that rich and successful people
don't have more of it than the rest of
us and what this thing does is it yearns
for righteousness we all want to lead
good lives we all delight in seeing a
moral person I about once a month I run
into somebody who just glows with an
incandescent light and those people are
always living leading lives of selfless
service we delight in act of pure
charity even criminals and Psychopaths
try to explain why what they're doing is
either good or at least excusable you
all have this yearning not only to be
good but to surround ourselves with
goodness I've noticed this about people
I observe especially people over 70 I
mentioned this to the students today
that often their lives have this shape
of a - Mountain shape in the first half
of their life they were they thought oh
that's my mountain to climb it's to have
a good career to build up your identity
build up your ego make some difference
in the world and then they they achieve
their career success or maybe they have
a failure and get knocked off the
mountain or something bad happens in
their life and they go down to the
valley and then they realize oh actually
that mountain wasn't my mountain there's
this second mountain which is actually
my mouth and where's the first mountain
is about building the ego the second
mountain tends to be out giving forth
pouring forth ego tends to be more
spiritual more service-oriented and they
want to give forth and it's less about
building up and more about emptying and
serving and sometimes it's a business
and then to charity sometimes they stay
in place but just transform the way they
do their lives and my view is sort of
like a metaphor that there's some peace
the soul is sort of this reclusive peace
it doesn't care about Facebook Likes or
money or status and for large parts of
your life it's sort of up in the woods
or up in the hill somewhere you don't
really think about it you're busy
raising your kids and all that kind of
stuff and then sometimes you vaguely or
urgently feel its presence there are
some nights you wake up in the middle
night you're having one of those bad
nights where as one poet put it your
thoughts come to you like a drawer full
of knives having those bad anxious
thoughts and then the Leopards sort of
there you're wondering about the meaning
and purpose of your life there are
moments of real joy where you feel sort
of spiritual uplift and you the leopard
is there they're moments of suffering
and grief but I think there are moments
in everybody's life where the leopard
comes out of the hills and he sits there
in front of you and he asks you for your
justification what do you do while
you're here what's your purpose what
good you did you'd serve and the people
who haven't given those questions a lot
of thought they feel the absence and
they have to live with that knowledge
and so I've emphasized this emphasis on
heart and soul because I think primarily
were culture builders we create these
shared cultures to bond with each other
but also to serve some good together and
some people are technological
determinists they think technology
drives history some people are economic
determinist I think economics drives
history I'm a cultural determinist I
think culture matters most and so I'm
gonna try to describe to you three
different cultures that I think
America's gone through and is about to
go through and the first culture is sort
of the era from the early 20th century
up until about 1968 and this was the
generation and the time when people had
to face a Depression they had to face
world wars and they were very group
oriented and they built a moral ecology
a moral culture based on the idea we're
all in this together
they were very group oriented they
served in big organizations the army
labor unions IBM and they really good at
building tight communities if you lived
on Chicago's South Side where Carol and
I went school you probably if you were
living in South West Chicago you
probably followed your grandfather or
father into the nabisco plan the big
company that was you could work for for
your life you joined the Union if you
lived in the community you were really
part of a dense community most people
than the neighborhood in your
neighborhood were one ethnic identity
you were polish you were Italian you're
Irish you were black there was no TV or
air conditioning really in those days
and so in summer nights all the doors
were open people were out in one
community the kids were running through
all the different houses there was a
constant round of barbecues coffee
klatches babysitting cooperatives
constant trading of household goods if
somebody asked you where you were from
you didn't say oh I'm from Chicago
you said I'm from 59th in Pulaski a
distinct intersection because your
neighborhood was so tightly defined and
if you went into politics or any
business you served the organization if
you went into politics who served the
Machine and you worked your way up there
was a guy named Jim Ferry who served as
the Democratic in the Illinois State
Legislature as part of boss Daly's
machine and toward the end of his career
he was rewarded he'd served in the
legislature for up time they said we'll
give you a seat in Congress for a term
so you can say you were a congressman
and they asked him when he was about to
go to Washington how he would vote and
he replied I will go to Washington to
help represent Mayor Daley for 20 years
I represented the mayor in the
legislature and he was always right and
so that's deference to Authority and
there was a lot of good about that
culture there was a lot of tightness
there was a lot of modesty there was a
culture of self-effacement I'm no better
than anybody else but nobody's better
than me it was a culture of deep
humility my favorite definition of
humility is radical self-awareness from
position of other centeredness you
really see yourself accurately you don't
get too big for your britches it had
some weaknesses that culture tolerance
of racism sexism anti-semitism emotional
coldness fathers had a tough time
talking to their kids about how much
they loved them the food was really
boring
life was not as creative but it was
tight and so there was a transition that
culture had to go and when I think about
the transition I read about this in the
road to character I think of one
football game Super Bowl three which
happened in 1969 on one side of the
field was Johnny Unitas quarterback for
the Baltimore Colts 1950s kind of guy
boring crew-cut high-top shoes who wore
white button shirts off the field he
earned $150 a week at a job in a
container company while he was playing
in the NFL on the other side of the
field was a guy named Joe Namath
long-hair hippie lifestyle posed in
pantyhose ads he was a swinger he wrote
a book called I can't wait until
tomorrow because I get better-looking
every day and that's a shift in those
are two different cultures they both
came from western Pennsylvania but they
were born ten years apart and the
culture had shifted that favored the
young not the old the expressive not the
reticent the casual not the formal the
rebel not the conformist the individual
not the institutional and was brought
about by people who wanted to do good in
the world the old system wasn't working
for them and so for example in 1962 a
group of college students got together
at Port Huron Michigan and created this
students for Democratic Society the
document called the Port Huron Statement
and their ethos was not we're all in
this together their ethos was I'm free
to be myself they wanted to be
independent they wanted creativity they
wanted to chart their own course the
goal and man in society they wrote
should be human independence to leading
a life that is personally authentic to
do what with one's life as one wants
they ones that break free from all the
conformity and this idea got expressed
in a lot of different ways in the civil
rights movement of the feminist movement
the peace movement rock and roll it had
right-wing versions in the 1980's the
Reagan inherited the Goldwater emphasis
on individual liberty liberation in the
economic sphere in the 60s and 70s from
Janis Joplin to movies like The Graduate
it was about individual liberation and
social sphere but on both sides from
litem right and left it was a we it was
about individual liberation and this was
a new culture and it it solved the
problems of the day my emphasis my
instinct is that cultures generally move
forward but not in a steady line they
have what one historian called a ratchet
hatchet pivot ratchet pattern people
ratchet up as they discover a new
culture it solves the problem their time
and it lasts for a little while but then
it sort of gets outdated and so they
have to tear it apart they have to
hatchet it up to cut it apart then they
pivot and they create a new ratchet and
that's sort of how culture moves forward
and that that I'm treated by myself
create a lot of good things civil rights
movement feminism we became a much
looser and creative nation I don't think
we could at Silicon Valley and the
information age economy without an
individualist ethos it created the age
of the what I called in one book called
the Bobo's people with 60s values and
90s money these are people who you know
they shop in a progressive grocery
stores like Trader Joe's and Whole Foods
where all the cashiers look like they're
on loan from Amnesty International
you've been in those stores I just said
that in that book my favorite part is
the snack food section in those stores
because they couldn't have pretzels and
potato chips that's not morally
enlightened enough and so they have
these seaweed based snacks with like
what we bought veggie booty with kale
which is like for kids who come home and
say mom mom I want to snack that a whole
prevent colorectal cancer yeah
so the Bobo's like the sort of textured
nubby fabrics that looked like they were
on some Peruvian donkey in that culture
you could spend a lot of money on any
room formerly used by the servants so
like a $350 coffeemaker seemed
absolutely normal and it was a it was a
shift in the culture and we're living at
the tail end of that culture and the
downsides of this individualistic
culture are evident today a friend of
mine is in NYU social psychologist named
Jonathan Hite he says imagine a bunch of
kids holding a pole one kid holding the
pole the rest holding each other by the
arm and they're running around the pole
swirling around it the faster they run
the more the pressure on their hands and
their grips and finally it all just
blows apart and the chain blows apart
cuz they can't hold on to each other
anymore and he says that's what's
happened in America that the you have 50
or 60 years of excessive individualism
you're gonna break apart and to me the
primary challenge we face as a country
and the primary challenge that students
at Davidson will face in the course of
their lives is a crisis of social
solidarity a crisis of loneliness
society that doesn't is no longer
cohesive enough in 1980 twenty percent
of Americans reported feeling lonely now
twice as many do 35 percent of people
over 45 are chronically lonely a
generation ago only 8% of Americans
lived alone now nearly 30 percent - in
1970 married couples entertained friends
in their home on average 15 times a year
now they do it about eight times a year
only eight percent of Americans report
having an important conversation with
their neighbors fertility rates are down
more American households Norah now have
dogs and have children the fastest
growing religious party is unaffiliated
the fastest growing religious movement
is unaffiliated we've seen a rise in
suicide rates since 1999 so 25% more
people die from suicide than car crashes
and suicide is just a proxy for
loneliness we've seen rises in
depression rates
Rises and mental health problems rises
in drug addiction and opiate addiction
which are just slow motion forms of
suicide there's been a spread of
distrust if you ask people generation
ago do you trust most of the people
around you 60 years that percent of
people would say yeah I trust people
around me now 32% say that and among
Millennials it's only nineteen percent
if you ant there's been a loss of
national confidence if you ask people a
generation ago do you think America is
the greatest nation on earth fifty
percent said yes
now that's down to thirty two percent
among Millennials and so we've just seen
this fragmentation and with this
fragmentation breeds alienation people
feel the institutions of society a
remote cutoff the most important
statistic in polling for politics is do
you trust government do the right thing
most of the time in that earlier culture
the witness to gather culture 80 percent
of Americans decade after decade said
yes I trust government do the right
thing most of the time now it's about 20
percent who say that widening inequality
I don't have to tell you about that
rising polarization and then finally I
think the crisis is as much a crisis of
meaning as a crisis of anything else the
ethos of individualism asks all of us to
come up with our own purpose and our own
meaning in life Justice Anthony Kennedy
put it famously at the heart of Liberty
is the right to define one's own concept
of existence of meaning one's own answer
to the mystery of life how's that for a
homework assignment to find your own
concept of existence your own concept of
meaning your own answer to the mystery
of life if your name is Nietzsche maybe
you can do that the rest of us have
trouble moreover we're in a system the
meritocratic system which is its own
system and in this Bert character book
might complain against the meritocracy
good though it is in many ways is that
it Kirk encouraged us to think about the
resume virtues the thing that make us
good at our job and causes us to be so
busy that we tend to be inarticulate
about the eulogy virtues the things they
say about us after we're dead whether
honest courageous capable of great love
you begin to think about yourself
differently in a meritocracy or not a
soul to be elevated you're a set of
skills to be maximized and it's like
Marxism but we are our own exploiters
our own Labour's what we're exploiting
and so what happens and I see this with
my students is they graduate from
college they drift and have a failure
and then they really go through a tough
time in their 20s and I've come to
expect of calls and I call it the Telos
crisis Tilos is a sense of purpose and
Nietzsche said he who has a why to live
for can endure anyhow he who has a why
to live for can endure any how if you
know why you're doing it when you get
setbacks you can soldier through them
but if you don't know why you're doing
it you get a setback you really fall
apart and so we haven't for a lot of the
students and a lot of young people who
are drifting in their 20s of all
different social classes they don't yet
know what their purpose is and they've
been asked to come up with on their own
and it's not their fault
it's because we have given them no moral
ecology on how to answer those big
questions I go to a lot of commencement
speeches and have been known to give a
few and they're sort of things to look
at and study because they are sort of
the epitome of the moral culture of the
day colleges and universities hire
successful people to come give graduates
talks on how career success really
doesn't matter and if you actually look
at them I always say when I give a
commencement talk I hope this happens at
Davidson and we said when you come up
and get your degree go up to the college
president and tip him or her 10 or 20
bucks just to show she did a good job
and they never do that but when you look
at the addresses you see how useless
they are to the students that are
actually graduating into the world by
and large the students are graduating
from the most supervised childhoods in
human history and they're about to be
spit out of to the most unsupervised
phase in human history
a modern 23 24 year olds they're looking
for a place to plant themselves what
vacation do i do what do I commit my
life to what do I dedicate my sooo self
- they're looking for grounds to plant
themselves in and we give them the whole
freedom gospel the last 50 years your
purpose is to be free freedom is
happiness keep your options open explore
that doesn't help them solve the
essential problem they're faced with
they're drowning and freedom they don't
know what to do their freedom for what
path is their path so we give them the
next empty box the empty box of
possibilities the future has unlimited
you can do anything you want you protect
your mind - the journeys that has
destination take risks this - is
entirely useless to them when someone is
trapped in uncertainty it doesn't help
to be told your options are limitless so
then they ask well what's the sources of
authority where can I find wisdom and so
we hand them another empty box the empty
box of authenticity look inside yourself
find your true inner self try and find
your own deep passion you're so amazing
well 80% of college students graduate
without no deep passion they don't know
what their deep passion is because
passion only comes after you've been
doing the work and the self hasn't yet
been formed the answers are not hid in
the self they're looking for guidance
and we just hand them a sense of it's
all in you and there's no form here and
so that I think is not on them that's on
a culture that doesn't know how to
explain a moral ecology and a hierarchy
of values and I think it's had severe
costs that David Foster Wallace - spent
his lifetime describing in his famous
address at Kenya and he said that his
there's something that doesn't have much
to do with physical circumstances or the
economy or the stuff that gets talked
about on the news it's more like a
stomach level sadness I see it in myself
and my friends in different ways it
manifests itself in a kind of lostness
this is a generation that has an
inheritance of absolutely nothing as far
as moral values is concerned
and so to me we have these three great
crises that are all coming at the end of
this age of individualism crisis of
social solidarity of social capital
social cohesion a crisis of
institutional crusts trust and then a
crisis of meaning and it's like one of
those moments in history where cultures
all around the world are facing the same
sort of problems like May 1848 1905 1930
to 1968 and a certain group has arisen
and say you've got this crisis we've got
the answers they say the answers to the
excesses of individualism are tribalism
and populism and in their theory we
should move from where all ends together
to I'm free to be myself to return to
tribe and and the populous understood
that the normal debates in that I'm
talking about Donald Trump I'm talking
about people around the world and as
well as some of the identity tribalists
in the multicultural community that were
no longer having debates about the size
of government they understood that
quickly we're having debates about what
is our fundamental identity what binds
us as a people what's our vision of a
just society the populous understand
very well and the tribalists had to tear
down a decaying old system in the 1960s
there was a guy named Abbie Hoffman who
wasn't great at a genius but he was
great at political theater and he
exposed the riffs and the failures of
the old sculpture that he wanted to
destroy now in my view Donald Trump is
the Abbie Hoffman of our day he's really
good at exploiting the weaknesses
exposing the rifts and making them worse
and so the populist also understood that
when society fragments and people feel a
crisis of meaning they they revert to
their final primal sense of meaning
which is their tribe I was covering
Europe in the 1980s and 1990s and for
five years I covered nothing but good
news I covered that the kindness of
Union the fall of Berlin Wall the
reunification of Germany Mandela coming
out of prison in South Africa the Oslo
process in the Middle East it was all
good news it seemed like liberal
democracy was triumphant and then just
that my end of my time there's a foreign
correspondent the Yugoslavia arted the
Serbian the genocide of Serbia Bosnia
and nationalism was starting and ever
since then it's been on the march and
democracy has been on retreat tribalism
says what I think is the right
philosophy The Crooked Timber of
humanity says of philosophy says the
line between good and evil runs through
each individual each of us but tribalism
says the line between good and evil runs
between groups tribalism now dominates
our politics that negative polarization
where people don't really like their own
party very much but they sure hate the
other thing and the other guys and this
tribalism dominates our identity
movements history is often taught as a
series of oppressor versus oppressed
tribal conflicts and tribalism has a
distinct mentality especially all around
the world it's always making men Trump
does this friend enemy distinctions it's
always us versus them the core of life
is always conflict in combat it's always
a warrior mentality politics is war
society is tribal everything is zero-sum
and they encourage a sort of siege
mentality our group is under attack our
very existence is at stake so we need an
authoritarian strong man to defend us
and the ends of our survival justify any
means they have an instinct which is to
build walls to erect barriers a
conspiratorial mindset mistrust is their
worldview and it has to be said that
their movement is on the march as I said
the authoritarian strongmen are doing
well politics has now taken over by
tribalism some universities it's being
taken over there too and it's where we
are heading today I spent the afternoon
a few come a month or two ago with Steve
Bannon and it was fascinating it was
like being with Trotsky in 1905
it was like he has this 50-year plan
Trump was a piece of the plan he has the
thinker's he goes back to he has all the
global alliance of people who he thinks
were part of his army Viktor Orban and
Austria Putin and it's like a big world
historical domination idea he may be
crazy I don't know I thought he was more
crazy but a lot of the plan seems to be
working and then there are us or at
least me and I think a lot of us is we
we don't want to have a culture that's
returned to tribe we don't want to live
in that world
we're not tribalists and there are a
couple problems with people like us the
first is we know what we're against but
we don't really know what were for we
have some vague words diversity openness
cultural pluralism common Civic
conversation respect for facts but these
are vague words we've forgotten we've
taken our system what we believed for
granted for so long that we've forgotten
the arguments for them second were
dispersed and disorganized the populist
and the tribalists have their structures
they have our organizations we just
complain dispersed third were defensive
we're surprised by events we're
depressed backed on our heels
we've lost touch with large parts of the
country the Trump steamrolled the
Republican establishment so easily and I
think the same thing is gonna happen to
the Democratic establishment and a lot
of us feel politically homeless because
we're disorganized and yet over the past
especially over the last two or three
months I've begun to feel and everywhere
I go a sense of stirring a lot of people
who were shocked by the Trump victory
shocked by the rise of populism around
the world it breaks it begun to notice a
stirring oK we've spent a year or so
being angry surprised and appalled what
actually affirmative ly can we do and
everywhere I go every organization I
call Freedom House National Endowment
for democracy universities you begin to
see people mobilizing just trying to
asking what affirmative Lee can I be for
what can I do and to me I'm a writer and
I mentioned the bookish side
and but at moments like this you feel
the futility of writing it's all of us
frankly at the New York Times The
Washington Post and most people the Wall
Street Journal you can hurl your columns
against the wall it doesn't seem to do
much good and so you do sort of learn
the lesson of the folks in the 60s who
made that cultural shift whether it
support your on or feminism that what
changes history is not so much
individuals that does but social
movements you got to create a an
organization of people that community
that people want to join and they'll
bend their energies toward you and
mobilize their energies toward you and
so I'd say the first job is to bring the
dispersed people together the second job
is to figure out collectively what were
for the way the Port Huron Statement did
the way the Earth Charter did when the
founders of this country wrote the
Declaration of Independence one people
has to separate from another they
weren't actually a people they were
thirteen dispersed colonies but it was
the act of writing the Declaration and
then fighting in defense of it that we
became a people and the third task is to
hold up a better way to live the
movements that really work don't just
offer statements and policy agendas they
hold up role models and give people a
possibility to transform their lives and
so I've been thinking all who are the
people that have credibility in society
today it's frankly it's not
intellectuals particularly it's not
politicians
I think it's social healers it's people
who are doing the crisis the suicide
prevention hotlines the after-school
programs the poverty programs who are
there in the streets they have
credibility and somehow it maybe it's
possible that those people all those
community workers all around the country
they can unite and can be united into a
movement that will heal the national
fabric the other thing about moments
like this is their wide generation gaps
I used to think with my students that we
basically have the same categories we
think the same way I don't feel that
about college students anymore people
under 30 I think though they have
different categories than me they think
things do
than me and surely whatever social
movement is gonna instill instill the
next era it's not going to be run by 60
year old white guys it's gonna be run by
the young and to me what the final thing
that's needed is a vision of a different
moral ethos to replace I'm free to be
myself and that's not returned to tribe
and to me the ethos of commitment is the
ethos I commit to you it builds on the
fact that on the core of our lives most
of us make four big commitments to a
spouse and family to a vocation to a
philosophy or faith into a community and
the fulfillment of our lives depends on
how well we choose and execute those
commitments make the kind of commitment
that in the bible ruth made to Naomi
where you go I will go where you Lodge I
will Lodge your people shall be my
people and your God my God where you die
I will die and there I will be buried a
commitment starts with falling in love
with something falling in love with
vocation with a school with an idea with
a person and sometimes it happens
superfast I heard a story about a
hairdresser in in Houston named daavid
and there was a woman who was a pianist
in Houston and she was about to move to
San Francisco to be with her fiance and
she decided before she'd go she'd get
her hair done so she went to dahveed's
salon she walked in she saw dahveed
cutting somebody else's hair she went
into the dressing room to put on her
gown and she called her mom and said
I've just seen the man I've actually got
to marry so she gets out in the chair
she gets her hair washed sits down
dahveed is cutting her hair he says
what's your story and the woman says
well I'm a pianist and I but I'm about
to move to San Francisco to be with my
fiancee but I won't do it if you'll
marry me and as Davi described it he
said I looked down at my scissors at
that moment and I've never felt more
free than I did that that second and I
said it's a deal and they've been
married seven
seniors so sometimes the love happens
quickly other times it happens a little
more slowly but you fall in love with
something the scientist named Eva Wilson
was on the beach when he was 8 years old
he saw ants he's been studying ants for
the last 80 years
he found his vocation and once you fall
in love with something you want to make
promises to it you want to be faithful
to it you're just curious about it you
find that it becomes part of your
identity you get to that moment of a
double negative I can't not do this and
it becomes life defining a commitment is
not like a contract the contract is
something you do for your own
self-interest that doesn't change you a
commitment changes who you are you're
not just a man and a woman you're
husband and wife you're not just an
adult you're a teacher or a nurse
Jonathan Sacks a rabbi said the contract
is a transaction a covenant is a
relationship a contract is about
interests a covenant is about identity
it's about personal transformation so
you make this promise to a person or to
your vocation or to your faith and it
transforms who you are and then you live
it out my favorite definition the
fullest definition of a commitment is
falling in love with something and then
building a structure of behavior around
it for those moments when love falters
Jews love their God but they keep kosher
just in case just to give them a
structure behavior football players like
football but they have a rigorous
practice schedule just in case our
commitments give us our identity you're
a writer you're a teacher you're an
executive you're a Jew you're a
Christian you're a liberal conservative
our commitments give us a sense of
purpose the things we really have thrown
ourselves into
in 2007 the Gallup Organization has
people all around the world do you feel
your life has purpose and the country of
all the countries in the world the
country where most people said yes my
life has purpose was Liberia and it
wasn't because life is so easy in
Liberia in those days
quite the contrary but survival required
extreme commitment to the people around
them an existential urgency and out of
that came a sense of purpose most
important commitments give us our moral
character he fall in love with something
and then you want to rise to the
occasion when my oldest kid was born he
was a difficult birth and he had a low
Apgar score of the three or four he
comes out blue and the doctors take him
right away and they rush him off to the
intensive care and of course it's a
harrowing moment but I remember having
this weird thought at that moment which
is that if he only lives for 30 minutes
and we have to suffer a lifetime of
grief somehow it will still be worth it
and that doesn't make any sense
by non-commitment logic but any parent
will understand it it makes sense
somehow that the dignity of a life
you've helped create is so infinite that
somehow yeah that would be worth it when
you make a commitment to something your
love impels you to make vows you make
promises to those things to always be
there for the kid and those promises are
things you want to live up to
they involve self sacrificial practices
you'd rather play golf but you're
pushing the baby carriage then you do
that enough and habits get engraved into
a disposition you get in the habit of
serving your kid and and eventually
putting the child's needs first becomes
second nature and so you can't even tell
the difference between giving and
receiving giving to something you're
committed to is giving to a piece of
yourself so altruism feels just like
selfishness and it reminds you that
moral formation is not individual it's
relational it's out of our commitments
and commitments seem like tribalism like
aren't Nazis committed to their Nazism
but it's different the mentality is
completely different people who are
tribalists always need another they need
an enemy and they're motivated by
mistrust suspicion and hatred but a
commitment really does flow out of love
and the thing about love is it
doesn't need another it doesn't need an
imposing it actually resists that it
wants to climb the ladder and connect
everything in a chain of love play don't
notice this years ago when he described
his theory of Education and it was
called the ladder of the beauties he
said if you want to educate a child
present him with a beautiful face and
when the child sees a beautiful face he
realized well physical beauty is nice
but there's a higher beauty which is a
beautiful personality and they'll fall
in love with that and when they see a
beautiful personality that realized
there's a higher beauty which is a
beautiful Society adjust order and when
they see that they'll realize there's in
higher beauty which is truth and
intellectual pursuits and when they see
truth they'll think well there's even a
higher beauty which is the one transient
transcendent beauty the beauty of all
creation from which nothing can be taken
into which nothing can be added
Edmund Burke sort of built on that but
in the physical realm he had these
little platoons and we all live in this
chain of loves you and your spouse rest
in your family your family rests in the
neighborhood the neighborhood rests in
your city your city rests in your region
your region rests in your nation your
nation rests in the world and you all
rest in some eternal ideal and so when I
look at the people whose commitments I
admire the most are the they are the
ones that bridge these chains they
connect one lay over two of them on
their neighbor I have a friend named
Roger who lives in who lives in northern
Louisiana really small town up in
northern Louisiana and he had a sister
named Ruthie and Ruthie was one of these
incandescent personalities and
unfortunately she died she was a teacher
she died really young like 42 43 and the
town has like it you don't your people
but sixteen hundred people came to the
funerals she was that kind of person and
she loved to go barefoot so the firemen
her husband was a fireman they they the
firemen carried her casket barefoot into
the gravesite and one of the things she
did to create this community
her teaching job but just in community
service was on Christmas Eve she always
thought the dead of the town should be
remembered so she would go around to the
cemetery the one cemetery in town and
she'd put a candle on each grave and
light it just to remember the dead and
she died just before Christmas Eve and
rod went to his mom and said you know
it's Christmas Eve should we do what
Ruthie did and put a candle on the
gravestones and his mom said you know in
normal years I'd love to do that I'd
love to this year heard she's just died
it would just be too tough and so they
decide not to they drove to another
family member's house and they'd
happened to drive past the cemetery and
somebody else had put a lit candle in
every gravestone and that's how the
statement of one community member gets
carried along by other community members
in a community is formed I'm part of a
community on Thursday nights I have two
friends named Cathy and David and they'd
a kid in DC Public Schools and that kid
had a friend whose mom was sort of had
some drugs and health issues the dad was
split he didn't have a place to eat or a
place to sleep really so they said well
have James come over and he can stay
with us some of the time and then James
had a friend and James had a friend and
now when you go into their basement
there's mattresses all over and when you
go to table on Thursday night where we
have dinner every week there are 2530
kids around the table and the one woman
came she was new she was 21 she said I
haven't been in a dinner table since I
was 10 and they all call Cathy mom and
dad we go around the table and every
week we say what we're grateful for was
something you don't know about us
I remember the first time I went in
there 3 or 4 years ago now I went up to
one of the kids and I reached out to
shake his hand and he said we don't
really shake hands here we hug here and
I'm like not the most emotionally like
physically you know kind of kind but we
all just hug each other and my daughter
I brought her one night and she left
that dinner and she said that's the
warmest place I've ever been and I
brought a friend of mine named Bill
Milliken who does youth counseling he's
probably about 75 and he says I'm always
asked what programs turnaround
lives and I've never seen a program turn
around a life the only thing that turns
around a life is a relationship and this
is the sort of healing across boundaries
that true commitment people have done
commitments have created these loves
across boundaries and we have a lot of
that at the local level but somehow it
hasn't risen to the national level we're
not good spouses to our country and
somehow expanding those community
healers up to the national level is
somehow a part of the healing and it's
not a great mystery we've seen how it's
done I spoke to the students today about
Abraham Lincoln and a second inaugural
that could have been a moment of great
chest-thumping instead he said it was a
moment of just binding and redemption
and reconciliation he didn't say the
slavery was a southern institution he
said it was an American institution in
the speech the key words are us what we
all we all didn't expect this conflict
we all thought it would go easier we're
all being punished
we must act with malice toward none
charity to all firmness in the right as
God gives us to see the right and so
what you see is the possibility of
national revealing and national
revealing around the theme of redemption
and to me that is the thing that's not
only good for a country it's good for a
people it's good for each of us because
the beauty of commitment and the thing
we were missing in a culture of
individualism is moral joy those
incandescent people I don't know how
many of you I'm sure everybody in this
room has had moments where they just
felt overawed by joy I had a moment I
was coming home from the NewsHour about
10 years ago and I've described this
many times I was pulling into my
driveway it was like 7:30 at night on a
summer afternoon or summer evening was
light still out pulling in the driveway
and it sort of wrapped around the house
so I could see into the backyard and I
saw light coming of the sunlight coming
through the trees and for some reason my
lawn looked great
and my kids were out there the three of
them like 12 nine and four at that point
and they were taking one of these
Supermarket plastic balls and they were
kicking it up in the air and they were
running across the yard and then
tumbling all over each other and just
laughing and joyous and giggling and I
just pulled into the driveway and I get
confronted by this tableau of perfect
family happiness and again I'm sure
parents have all experienced this it's
one of those moments where you just
looking at it and time seems to stop and
reality sort of spills outside its
boundaries and you just want to be
worthy of that happiness but it happens
at the far side of a commitment and in
meshed and a commitment it's when the
boundary between self and something else
seems to wash away we had a professor at
Chicago guy named William McNeil and he
described this well he was a soldier in
World War two he said it was I felt the
greatest joy ever felt while marching
with my troops he wrote words are
inadequate to describe the emotion
aroused by the prolonged movement in
unison that drilling involved a sense of
pervasive well-being is what I recall a
strange sense of personal enlargement is
sort of swelling out becoming bigger
than life
rabbi Wolff Coleman marched with King
and Selma and he recalled we felt
connected in song to the transcendental
the inevitable ineffable we felt
triumphant celebration we felt that
things change for the good and nothing
is congealed forever that was the
warmest most transcendental spiritual
experience meaning and purpose and
mission were beyond exact words meaning
was the feeling the song the moments the
overwhelming sense of spiritual
fulfillment David White is a poet who
wrote that joy is a meeting place of
deep intentionality and of self
forgetting the bodily alchemy of what
lies inside us in communion of what
formerly seemed outside us but is now
neither dance laughter affection skin
touching skin singing in the car music
in the kitchen
the quiet irreplaceable and
companionable presence of a daughter
the sheer intoxicating beauty of the
world inhabited as the edge between what
we previously thought was us and what we
thought was other than us so we're not
going to go back to the age of we're all
in this together we're not going to turn
into conformist or deference deferential
to Authority but we can't continue in
the world of hyper individualism and I
hope we don't return to tribalism and so
I hope we choose another path which is a
path of making choices to give up choice
to leave an ethos of commitment toward
each other and as I say history moves
and ratchets and it sometimes seems
depressing it's awful sometimes to cover
politics all the time but never lose
faith in human ingenuity that we will
make a cultural leap if we choose to
thank you
so we have this beautiful set here so
we're gonna sit here we can't see you so
hopefully you can see us
David's agreed to answer some questions
we'd like to give priority to our
students so for students who have
questions if you would come forward to
the microphones that are that are at the
front that would be great and and if
there are other questions we I'm sure
David would be happy to answer those as
well I thought that that I would start
in part to try to talk a little bit more
about the notion of commitment and
covenant that you are pointing us
towards I would say as an as a I would
say an evolution or a next step from
individualism that doesn't revert to we
they tribalism the the direction of some
of your cop columns has pointed to the
difficulty in doing that perhaps because
of a lack of faith in the institutions
that enable those kind of commitments
whether that's family or church or
synagogue or a faith community or other
institutions that channel or invite that
kind of commitment and of course one of
the reasons why over the past 50 years
faith and those things has declined is
that those things weren't empowering
didn't offer the same kind of meaningful
life or even moral possibility to all
people so is that is there a way to the
families the most obvious example but
certainly you know the deep legacies of
racism that we still live with here is
there a way to talk about that that that
acknowledges that that that the
institutions that we've inherited
didn't work for some and that
those institutions however valuable need
to somehow be reinterpreted or reimagine
by the next generation so that they can
perform this function or are there other
institutions covenantal institutions
that might play that role that makes any
sense
well first of all we hopefully will
harvest the last the benefits the last
50 years the civil rights movement
feminism all that gay rights movement
will harvest that and build on that I
think one of the things that that again
nationally that has to cohere is a
national narrative that takes all that
into account and one of the things I've
noticed I grew up and a lot of us grew
up I was talking to students about this
today with an an exodus narrative the
American narrative is an exodus
narrative we left oppression we cross
the ocean we came to the promised land
and that was what the Puritans that was
their story for a lot of us who have
came from immigrant backgrounds that was
our story we could buy into that story
for the civil rights movement Martin
Luther King talk more about Exodus and
just about anything else the founding
fathers Benjamin Franklin in Madison
wants have the Great Seal of the United
States be Moses but what I've noticed
for my students and for a lot of people
under 40 they no longer buy the Promised
Land story there's just been too much
history of oppression racism slavery all
this stuff so that narrative just
doesn't seem to make sense to them and
so that's why I emphasize Lincoln
because he does tell a story of
redemption and it's a story of yes
there's been sin but we can wreck we can
be unified around promises of
reconciliation it involves all the
processes that get you there and so a
process of of confession of process of
penitence a process of forgiveness a
process of reconciliation they're all
the steps along the way and that's maybe
for this generation that's just a more
compelling national narrative because
right now we don't have a national
narrative we have about four or five
we've got the sort of the Republican
more individualistic narrative we're all
lone Cowboys out there on the range
we've got the Silicon Valley where
global citizens in the world
technology and transformation which is
great if you went to Stanford
we've got the narrative of of
multiculturalism we're all different
groups locked in oppressor oppressor
relations and we've got frankly the
populist narrative which is the good
solid peasants are being oppressed by
outsiders and the elites which is
traditionally the Russian narrative not
our narrative but they took it and so
finding a new narrative seems to me that
record that reconciles all the wrongs
seems to me that's job one and I'd love
to gather historians from around the
country and say let's figure out a
narrative voice because we without a
national story it's really hard to rally
people across difference together well I
want to make sure so there I can't see
so are there questions does someone have
a question here look at this okay if you
could just say your name then we know
who you are
hi my name is Daniel you talked about
the you talked about the decrease in
trust amongst groups of people who are
familiar and society at large do you
think that that decreases trust was
caused by the the increase in
information that is available to people
whether it be on the people who are
around them or on the public figures and
do you think that if this amount of
information was available in the time of
community of like the 60s that you were
talking about where people grouped
together that they would still have the
same philosophy that's a good question I
would say the loss of trust in part is
just because you know we've lived
through Iraq and a financial crisis not
to mention Vietnam but there were
certainly major failures that everybody
knew about throughout American history
in the robber baron era world war one
didn't end well the depression there
were just major systemic failures and I
have the perverse belief that sometimes
we have too much transparency and as
we've had more transparency the amount
of
of trust declines a friend of mine says
government should be partially hidden
for the same reason middle-aged people
should wear clothing they don't
necessarily want to see everything and
you know I think there's there comes
there there actually comes a point where
it's possible to take certain sorts of
information and misinterpret what's
actually happening I when I first got my
current job I was told to interview
three politicians every day so I spent a
lot of time around politicians I don't
do it anymore because they're not as
interesting to me but I know a lot of
them and I will say they're way better
and private than they are in public and
the quality of the individuals in the
system is pretty good and if you met the
people who are federal workers and most
agencies at HUD or HHS I think you'd be
really impressed by them they are
working they're very smart very
accomplished people working for very
little money because they believe in
public service all these good people are
caught in a rotten system but it's not
like learning more about them makes
gives you less faith in democracy I
would say learning more it gives you
more faith as you meet the people and so
I I have this perverse view that
sometimes you can have too much
transparency and not enough discretion
to the people we've charged to run the
country and then we review their jobs
every few years hi I'm Ellie
so my question has to do with that
process of identity formation that
you're talking about as we're trying to
transition away from these different
phases that we've seen and what I'm
concerned about is entering into like
almost a French Revolution type
narrative where we feel really strongly
that we're seeing a lot of injustice and
that we need to address it and then we
do our best and then we look back and
realize that we've demonized people that
didn't deserve it and there are
definitely people who do deserve it but
not everybody
and not like the reign of terror
but like no social commentary or
something so I'm curious about your
suggestion and how we stay away from
that demonization and this concept of
like the scarcity of identity and
correctness so when we were freshmen at
the new Chicago I was assigned a book
called the reflections in the revolution
in France by Edmund Burke and I hated
that book and I wrote five or six papers
on what a complete moron
Edmund Burke was and so of course now
it's the big book in my life and it set
off something in me but I think he
points us to the way and he what it is a
tradition of first of all
epistemological modesty mr. Malla see a
study of what we can know in modesty is
modesty that you're just modest about
what you think you can know and the
revolutionaries who are fighting
injustice were not modest second a sense
of moderation and moderation is not
being mushy in the middle moderation is
thinking that most big public issues are
competitions between partial truths that
the right has the individualist have one
side the collectivist have another and
terror policy its security versus
freedom it's often achievement versus
equality there's these trade-offs the
world doesn't fit together neatly you've
got a balance and that balanced attitude
prevents you from becoming a zealot a
third attitude is that politics is a
limited activity Samuel Johnson said of
all the things in human hearts endure
how few are those that Kings can cause
and cure the things that really matter
in life are our relationships our
character our philosophy the things that
are precious in everyday life politics
matters I spent a lot of time in
politics but it's not the most important
thing in life and if you hang your hopes
on transformational lift-up of your soul
on politics you're hanging on on a realm
that wasn't meant to bear that burden
and you'll turn it into a sort of
fanaticism another belief of a moderate
is that creativity is synchronistic that
when you want to have something really
creative take something from this side
and something
that side and jam it together not all
from one side and not all from the other
and so if you have those humble breaks
in those attitudes then your you can
fight injustice and birth believe you
should do change constantly but
incrementally like like you said you're
operating on your own father be careful
but do it but but don't go in for the
kind of gsella tree and to me I'm sure
we've all noticed this how you believe
something is often more important than
what you believe do you believe the
fanaticism or do you say well I'm gonna
I only I need the person on the other
side because they're gonna correct me
from my own weaknesses and I know that I
need those who disagree with me or else
I'm worse off and if you have that sense
of moderation then you can fight
injustice without turning into a fanatic
yourself is there a question over here
hi my name is Michael in your talk you
mentioned this sort of burden and
existentialism that you know were
weighted with determining our own
meeting and that that might be alright
for someone like Nietzsche and I think
what that speaks to is this sort of you
know desire to throw away this you know
gift we've been given and sort of you
know just push it all into these you
know intellectually these you know great
leaders sort of types I think maybe you
could see that in her current state of
politics you know Congress was designed
to be the more powerful state of
government and wasn't supposed to be you
know the president pushing legislation
through but we should be excited about
our senators but I think really the mass
culture will get much more excited about
a presidential election than a
senatorial election for the very reason
of it's just you know more exciting
nationally it appears to more it appeals
to a more base desire to fight for this
great leader so if we do move along that
path where we you know we transform back
into this we let these great people lead
us and we throw away this you know gift
or a burden of self-determination do you
think that's a good solution do you
think that would lead to a productive
society and or do you think that's
likely at all
oh my instinct it's an infantilizing
solution that you know there is the
hunger around the world for a strong man
and they ask these polls I don't have
the numbers of my fingertips should the
president have to worry about Parliament
three niceties and large numbers of
people say no he shouldn't we should
just get things done
and one of the beauties of democracy
this is this colony right on John Stuart
Mill the beauty of democracy it invests
infinite dignity in each individual and
believes in their individual dignity and
their individual dignity to screw up or
whatever but it believes that the
strenuous life is is one you've taken
control of yourself and so the it is
interesting to me that the and this is
their this many people have made this
point before that an error of extreme
individualism at its extreme ends always
leads to tribalism and complete crushing
of the individual because when people
are naked and alone
they eventually just grab on to whatever
and so what you lose is any sense of
actual lived life because you just
blindly defer to Authority one of the
things that colleges can do we were
blessed to go to when we did and where
we did well we went to a place where
there were still some of the old German
refugees in Kerala one of the great
teachers and they as Kerala said they
they believed they had the keys to the
kingdom these great books that we
studied contained the wisdom of how to
live a life and I don't remember a lot
of what they told us but I remember the
fervor with which they believed this
that serious study and serious thinking
you could really elevate your life it
was high of a natural tendency toward
shallowness it was hard to be as shallow
after they'd preached this into you the
second thing they did way said you're
part of a great procession you're just a
little unworthy peon in this great
possession but you're in the procession
and so they allowed us entry into that
the third thing they did is they they
taught us how to see I have a favorite
quote from John Ruskin which I'm gonna
mangle which is something like the
longer I live the harder the more I
realize that the great talent is to see
something and to describe what you saw
in a plain way a thousand can talk for
one who can think but a million can
think for one who can see and when you
one of the purpose of going to school is
to encounter people who can really see
well and describe it clearly you read a
George Elliot novel Jane
Austen novel Tolstoy George Orwell they
just were so good at seeing and so these
skills these intellectual virtues have
to be cultivated and that's what schools
like this are for but they can easily be
forgotten and I will say I told the
students today that one of the tragedies
is going to offend the older people in
the audience
I said 60 or 70% of you will be more
boring at age 32 than you are right now
because he could fall into a rut people
fall into ruts and the second thing I've
noticed is I was teaching undergrads and
I would assign them an essay by is a
Berlin and then as a hobby some friends
and I were leading seminars in New York
among young professionals at 35 and the
students I could assign them things and
they could breeze right through they
really got the essays they liked them
they could talk intelligently and then
with the 35 40 year olds they'd say this
was really hard I couldn't really
understand it it's like what happened
you went to these same schools and you
could do when you were 21 why can't you
do it when you're 40 and there's like a
natural feeling that we've worried about
somehow that was rambling I apologize
thank you question over here my name is
Brian and I'm a member of a dying breed
which is mainline Protestants so as you
talked in your speech today about Ruth
and Naomi and I instantly had these
thoughts of the stories I'd grown up
with I thought about my three roommates
who were Buddhist atheist and agnostic
respectively and so I realized in
today's society the Civic religion that
we kind of grew up with is kind of
fading away especially as we have the
people who are these unaffiliated
religious individuals and so then I see
on the left there's kind of this these
two different approaches where you have
William barber here in North Carolina
who's really pushing for a return to a
religious fervor on the left and then
other people who are moving away from
that and I just wanted to see what you
thought about how those two interact I
do think we're here to Presbyterian
schools so I should be careful what I
say but I do think that that a Cline of
mainline Protestantism was a great
tragedy and that mainline Protestant
held the country together not in a
religious sense but there
many of the people who were mainline
Protestants had a civic Creed and I grew
up I went to a school in Episcopal
school called Grace Church school in New
York when I was a kid I was in the choir
and because it's New York 40% of us were
Jewish in the choir and so we would sing
the hymns but to square it with our
religion we wouldn't sing there were
Jesus and so the volume would just drop
down and then we'd come up and but
people like Reinhold Niebuhr and even
Catholic Fulton sheen these the great
theologians of the 40s and 50s took a
lot of religious wisdom and they
presented it to the wider culture and
that we had unified the whole country
and in my view a lot of mainline
Protestant organs ik sects lost faith in
their own religion and they became
declining parts of the country and you
had the rise of evangelism the rise of
everything else and that's and maybe
that had to happen as we became a more
diverse society but we're still trying
to fill in the gaps there were these
there's sort of the secular sermons of a
neighbor on the non-jewish side Abraham
Joshua Heschel
they were there and they were in the
culture and now we don't have anybody
talking about these moral issues I do
think I don't know you
in my experience while there's a rise of
non-affiliated there's a great spiritual
hunger in the country and I will say
this in two ways the first is I did this
book on character and I would talk about
Saint Agustin and I would get hired to
speak as part of my book tour to a
convention of 4,000 CFOs of major
corporations and they were there at
these conferences to talk about finance
and quarterly reports and health care
costs and return on dividends and return
on investment and then suddenly I would
appear to talk to them about Augustine's
concept of grace and George Eliot's love
life and I would walk into this room of
4,000 boring white guys in borings
and I would think this is not gonna go
well and when I was talking about that
stuff to them I heard a quality of
intense silence an intense focus that
I'd never heard before in my career as a
writer and it's and that book sold way
more than anything else I've ever
written not because it was better I just
happened to hit the moment that that
country is hungry for and then the
second thing I noticed is that every
form of Orthodox faith seems to be
exploding expanding and so if you go to
New York City if you go to Manhattan the
north side of something called the Great
Lawn in Central Park on a summer Sunday
afternoon there'll be three or four
thousand modern orthodox people in their
20s just milling about on the grass and
they they can't go on dates individually
so they get together on the grass and
they try to find each other and the
spread of Modern Orthodoxy is expanding
if you go to churches all around New
York City I'm familiar with New York
there are these plant churches small
churches there's one network called
Trinity grace
another called Redeemer another called
q3 you go to these churches and like
everybody in the church which are packed
they're like six months out of the womb
like everybody is super young and they
look like the hippest of hipster from
Brooklyn and Williamsburg and somehow I
look around in New York I think this is
all happening in New York and so while
the numbers may not show it yet somehow
it has the feel to me of some sort of
new religious revival that rejecting a
lot of the old forms but something new
was happening and I can't tell you what
shape it's gonna take but you just see
it in town after town and a lot of the
people are disgusted with the way
religion was manipulated by the older
generation and they're just creating
something new is our question here my
name is Wilson and you discussed a lot
about the access of freedom for people
coming out of college and deciding what
their
passions would be what the covenants are
gonna be you also mention a lot of great
philosophers and great thinkers which
one of the thinkers that you've read
would you recommend it first you know
somebody coming into that to really kind
of guide their decision-making yeah well
some are you know I'd read Victor
Frankel's man's search for meaning and
his main point was that he was a
psychologist and in the 30s and he was
sent to a concentration camp he was in
Austria
and he said you know I got to the
concentration camp and I realized the
question what do I want from life is the
wrong question the right question is
what is life asking of me what are my
circumstances asking me to do and so
it's just a more useful way to think
about how to organize your life is not
what do I want what's my passion it's
what is the big problem of the world
today so Elon Musk's graduated I think
from Penn he decided well there are
three big problems or big opportunities
today they're space travel there's clean
energy and there's the internet so it
created PayPal SpaceX and Tesla bad so
we're not all gonna do that but it's you
know one of the great phrases of of
finding a vocation is where does your
deep gladness meet the world's neatest
need and so locating finding what's the
big problem my day is just a good
question to ask and Frankel really
focuses you on that the one bit of
advice I can't help but offer it because
I when you reach a certain age you like
giving advice which is that your first
year out of college your life is
probably going to suck so just live with
that because like you're near here
you're this great community everybody
likes you your social life is right in
front of you you these great people are
afraid to give you a z' but then you get
out no one cares
and everybody on the other side of the
job interview they have that Kanye West
attitude there's a million of you
there's only one of me and so you have
to face that so what you should do and
this is not my thought but a friend of
mine had this thought well you should do
your only job your first year out is to
widen your horizon a risk you do
something completely crazy and forever
after you'll say I could do something
crazy and your horizon of risk forever
after we'll be here and and the person
who gave me this advice she got out of
college tried to get into Teach for
America didn't get it so she googled
teach abroad some guy from Korea wrote
to her and said yeah I've got a job do
you want to be a teacher here in Korea
teach English so she told her parents
there was some big official program but
it was just a guy in Korea so they get
her a plane ticket she lands at Seoul
wherever they fight a little Regional
Airport and she gets to the airport she
lands at 10:00 at night and there's
nobody there to greet her she doesn't
speak any Korean she has no Korean money
she's nothing and so she's sitting there
out on the bench and they Airport closes
there's one of the persons sitting on
the bench where they're a monk he gets
up and leaves they turn out the lights
at 3 or 4 a.m. a van pulls up with five
Korean guys and they say are you our
teacher and she says yeah and they say
get in the van if my daughter did this
I'd kill her but she got in the van she
spent the next nine eight months
teaching English and Korean she had a
great time and after you've done that
you figure yeah I can handle anything so
parents forgive me that's my advice for
their first day thank you we have time
for one more question is there a
question
hi my name is Abby and I'm coming away
from this speech inspired and but I know
that this is only in the beginning of
the semester and a lot of times
inspiration and then it drive to do
something often comes in waves so do you
have any insight or advice for how we
can maintain this passion or this
inspiration that we got from this well
you know the only thing I'd say is
history offers plenty of examples of
people who did gather together and
change history
the SDS I've come I'm believing on
politically as far away from the SDS as
as possible to be but I'm sort of
inspired by what they did first thing
they focused on a discrete issue they it
was 1962 they said you know what problem
isn't being addressed enough racism in
the north everybody assume racism was a
southern issue but Chicago was free of
it and that of course was the furthest
thing from the truth
so they picked a discrete issue and then
they picked a phrase that they thought
was the way society should be organized
and that phrase was deliberative
democracy that was the anchor they hung
everything around and then they realized
the key thing is that a movement really
it's wrong to separate the personal from
the political start with the values and
say what's the best life and then out of
your vision of your best individual life
then your best social social vision will
come out and so they just got together
and they had this meeting at Port Huron
which they described as as life
transforming for all of them and so it
was a group of young people finding
their moment and finding a vision for
the future and so you know one of the
things that markedly improves your life
is forming a community that meets
together once a week or once a month one
of the surefire ways to be happier is to
form a group of friends and meet once a
month the studies show it increases the
level of happiness more than if you had
earned an extra hundred and fifty
thousand dollars a year
that's just meeting with a group
regularly is just a super big happiness
booster because you're aiming towards
some purpose collectively that's what
the hardens the soul thing is all about
so the the one thing that the port yarn
didn't do or they did a little but what
occupy didn't do is they didn't believe
in institutions in hierarchy and if you
want to start something you can do that
as an individual but if you want to keep
something going
it takes an institution and so creating
those organizations is the key thing to
keep something going and then if you
find your interest flagging in the
middle of the semester I just cut a few
classes give F us a I I don't know I
mean I I have often given that advice
all those students look at me
skeptically and the faculty aren't crazy
about that advice I want to share with
you before we I ask you to join me in
thanking David just a sense that there's
a lot of examples around us of
individuals and groups whose outward
motivation seems to be dislike or
criticism or hatred and what you hear I
think coming from David and certainly
this is something that I would take away
from Agustin is that there's much more
power in acting out of love out of love
for the world with all its flaws out of
love and concern for people whose lives
could be better out of a love and desire
for the kind of connection that hate
completely blocks off so maybe we could
all leave tonight with gratitude to
David for inspiring us to think of the
world and that opened an expansive way
with an eye towards the love we have to
give rather than the hate we need to
seek retribution for please join me in
thanking David was
you